JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
nation reacts
to a new president-elect.
We hear from voices across
generations and
zip codes on the future of the
free world.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
give their take
on a momentous week, the start
of a new chapter
in American political life.
Plus: Paris one year later -- as
the Bataclan
club reopens for the first time
since the
terrorism attacks, a look at how
the city
is coping.
CAROLINE LANGLADE, President,
Life for Paris
(through translator): I think
that the most
beautiful response we can give
the terrorists
is love, joy, happiness,
culture, music.
So, we need to keep this going
as loud as
possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Donald Trump
announced a shakeup today at the
top of his
incoming transition team.
Vice president-elect Mike Pence
will take
over as chair, replacing New
Jersey Governor
Chris Christie, who becomes a
vice chair.
Former House Speaker Newt
Gingrich and former
New York City Mayor Rudy
Giuliani will be
among the other vice chairs on
the executive
committee.
Members of the committee also
include Mr.
Trump's three older children
Donald Jr., Eric
and Ivanka, as well as Ivanka's
husband, son-in-law
Jared Kushner.
In a statement, the
president-elect said -- quote
-- "Together, we will begin the
urgent task
of rebuilding this nation,
specifically jobs,
security and opportunity."
And in his first news interview
since the
election, Mr. Trump told The
Wall Street Journal
he is open to keeping some parts
of the Affordable
Care Act.
We will have more on Mr. Trump's
post-election
moves later in the program.
Protesters nationwide spent
another night
rallying against the
president-elect.
Demonstrations came to a head in
Portland,
Oregon, where thousands squared
off with police,
throwing bottles and rocks.
Officers responded with tear gas
and rubber
bullets.
They made 26 arrests.
For his part, Mr. Trump tweeted
that the protesters
were -- quote -- "very unfair,"
but later
said he "loved their passion for
our great
country."
The United Nations says the
Islamic State
has carried out a new wave of
public killings
and atrocities in the Iraqi city
of Mosul.
It reports that, in the last
week, militants
executed at least 70 civilians.
Some were hung from telephone
poles.
Meanwhile, in Geneva, a
spokeswoman for the
U.N. said the group could be
gearing up to
use chemical weapons.
RAVINA SHAMSADANI, Spokeswoman,
United Nations
High Commissioner for Human
Rights: We don't
know when and for what purposes
they are stockpiling
these, but given what they have
done in the
past, we are worried about the
reasons for
their stockpiling of these
chemicals in Mosul
right now.
But we can only speculate how
they -- they
intend to use this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The announcement
comes as Iraqi
security forces inched their way
into Mosul.
They have been slowed by heavy
resistance
and ISIS fighters using human
shields.
Back in this country, President
Obama used
Veterans Day to call for unity
in the wake
of a bitter election.
Mr. Obama laid a wreath at The
Tomb of the
Unknown at Arlington National
Cemetery.
He said Americans should learn
from the military
in finding ways to come
together.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The American instinct has never
been to find
isolation in opposite corners.
It is to find strength in our
common creed,
to forge unity from our great
diversity, to
sustain that strength and unity
even when
it is hard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
Britain and France
commemorated Armistice Day,
marking the end
of World War I. Prince Harry led
a service
at the Armed Forces Memorial in
England, while
French President Francois
Hollande laid a
wreath at his country's Tomb of
the Unknown.
Stocks were mixed on Wall Street
today, but
the Dow Jones industrial average
closed at
a record high, extending its
post-election
rally for another day.
The Dow gained more than 39
points to close
at 18847.
The Nasdaq rose 28, while the
S&P 500 slipped
three.
For the week, the Dow gained
more than 5 percent,
its best week since December
2011.
Both the Nasdaq and the S&P 500
rose nearly
4 percent.
And Secretary of State John
Kerry has become
the highest ranking U.S.
official to visit
Antarctica.
He's spending two days there,
meeting with
scientists and getting a
firsthand look at
the impact that climate change
has had on
the southernmost continent.
Kerry is gathering information
before he attends
a global climate change summit
in Morocco
on Tuesday.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the fallout
from a sharply divided election
plays out
in schools across the nation;
Mark Shields
and David Brooks on what voters
were saying
and what lies ahead; healing in
Paris one
year after deadly terror attacks
darkened
the City of Light; and much
more.
Now more on the aftermath of
Tuesday's election.
We take two looks at the ways
that the rhetoric
and emotion of the highly
charged presidential
campaign continue to
reverberate.
First, we go to Manassas,
Virginia, about
30 miles West of Washington,
D.C., near the
site of the first major battle
of the Civil
War.
After decades of supporting
Republicans, Virginia
voted Democratic on Tuesday for
the third
consecutive presidential
election.
The state's demographics are
shifting rapidly,
and like much of America, the
division between
red and blue is stark.
We spoke with people from across
of the political
spectrum caught up in the wake
of one of the
biggest political upsets in our
nation's history.
Here are some of their voices.
BRETT TUCKER, Trump Voter: A lot
of division
has occurred in this great
country over the
last decade, and a lot of them
is almost reflective
to the time period of when the
guns blazed
on this battlefield and men
fought for what
they believed in.
And I think America is kind of
in the same
scenario where we're divided on
our beliefs
in politics.
To me, as I travel the country,
I just feel
the sense of urgency to repair
it.
I'm Brett Tucker, 46, from
Washington state.
And I voted for Mr. Trump.
DON CLEMONS, Trump Voter: My
name is Don Clemons.
I am 80 years old.
I live at St. Joseph, Illinois,
and I voted
for Donald Trump for president.
I have seen John Kennedy, and I
didn't vote
for him.
I wished I would have.
I have seen Ronald Reagan,
Dwight Eisenhower,
you know, during my lifetime.
See, I have voted in every
presidential election
since 1958.
I think that's about right.
And these are the two weakest
candidates that
I have ever seen that I had to
vote for.
SUSAN ARTZ, Trump Voter: I'm
Susan Artz.
I'm from Aldie, Virginia.
I'm 67 years old.
And I voted for Donald Trump for
president
of the United States of America.
I think these other countries
should do more
of their share.
They pay so much less for NATO
than we do.
I traveled around the world by
the time I
was 21.
And I looked at all they have,
like he says,
with our infrastructure, with
the railroads
and all, and they have so much
better than
we do.
VANESSA ALLEN, Trump Voter: I'm
Vanessa Allen.
I'm retired, and life is not
easy, and I am
a Democrat.
I think we have got a lot of
dummies.
I really do.
I mean, if you truly listen to
what he says,
I don't even see how you can
push that button
on that computer voting for him.
It's just -- it's crazy.
I worked all my life, never
took, never got,
unless I made it.
And now what, you know?
So, I don't think he will do
anything great.
I really don't.
SALIM AMIN, Sanders Voter: My
name is Salim
Amin.
I'm 23 years old, and I voted
Bernie Sanders
as a write-in.
I was born in Germany.
And my parents are from
Afghanistan.
I'm not primarily concerned
about the president
himself.
I'm more concerned about the
people he's riled
up, the actual racist people,
the misogynistic
people that are feeling like
they were -- fueled
the fire to be able to make sure
-- whatever
they want to do.
LAMYAA MOWERY, Virginia: We
can't succumb
to what they want, and we need
to be much
stronger than we ever were
before.
NATHAN MOWERY, Virginia: I'm
Nathan Mowery,
and I'm a five-year Army combat
veteran.
This is my wife.
LAMYAA MOWERY: And I'm Lamyaa
Mowery.
I'm a nursing student.
NATHAN MOWERY: And we just got
married in
October.
And we are here in our house in
Virginia.
LAMYAA MOWERY: Already, after we
found out
that president-elect Trump won,
people have
gotten bolder.
There have been cases where
women are pumping
gas and they have been yelled at
to take off
their scarf, or walking in a
grocery store
and telling them that this is
going to be
the end of you and it's time for
you to leave.
And it's only the beginning, and
I'm sure
that everyone is going to see a
rise in it.
ALICE BUTLER-SHORT, Founder and
Director,
Virginia Women for Trump: When
Mr. Trump says
make America great again, he
means let's bring
it back to where it was and move
forward and
make it even greater.
And I am absolutely convinced
that he will
do that.
My name is Alice Butler-Short.
I am the founder and director
for Virginia
Women for Trump.
Immigrants will always be
welcome in this
country, but the right
immigrants.
We have got to keep this country
safe, and
we have had experiences of
terrorism and terrorist
attacks.
And we know it's not going to
end.
So, we have to take precautions.
THOMAS VLADIMIR MENDOZA, Opposed
Trump: My
name is Thomas Vladimir Mendoza.
And I am a U.S. citizen.
I live in the United States, so
I'm American.
But I was born in El Salvador.
My fears is that I won't have a
job, that
I won't be able to feed my
child.
Don't fear a loudmouth.
You know what I mean?
That's what this person is.
He's just -- I have a lot of
friends that
are loudmouths, and you hear and
you dismiss
it because they're friends.
But because this guy is going to
be the president,
it's really hard to dismiss it.
You cannot just say, he's just
talking, man,
it's just locker room talk.
No, it's true.
He has that in him, but, you
know, the good
in people is not going to let
him do that.
I have hope.
I have faith.
That's what everybody wakes up
and should
have, faith that things will be
better.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some powerful
voices.
And next: schoolchildren and how
the combative
political season has affected
them.
And to Hari Sreenivasan in New
York.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Teachers and
parents across
the country report heightened
anxiety and
disappointment among some
students, even a
number of school walkouts in
recent days.
In other cases, incidents of
intimidation
and bullying have been reported,
including
graffiti with swastikas, calls
for white power
in a Pennsylvania high school,
and Michigan
middle school students chanting
"Build that
wall" during lunch period.
The "NewsHour"'s Student
Reporting Labs gathered
these reactions from across the
country.
ALLICIA DEAN, Student: When I
found out that
Donald Trump had won the
presidential election,
I was scared.
I was just staring at my phone
in shock, and
I had no idea what was going to
happen next.
JULIAN MASTERS, Student: I'm not
devastated
that Trump is president.
I think it sends a pretty strong
message to
the American people that
something needs to
change.
A vote for Trump doesn't mean
you are a bigot,
a racist or anti-woman.
Maybe the country does need to
be run more
like a business, so we can
actually get things
done.
JESSICA BRUNT, Student: I just
didn't understand
how such a hateful man could
rise to power
so quickly.
And I have been really angry,
but now I'm
just tired.
I'm tired that he is now
state-sponsored.
SKY ISLAND THOMAS, Student: I
feel like a
lot of students, people in
general, educated
themselves through social media
and what was
on television, rather than
informing themselves.
MARTA KIROS, Student: I feel
like, as minorities,
as people of color, at LGBT
community, as
Muslims, as everyone who has
ever been prejudiced
again and anyone who's ever
expressed inequality,
we all need to make sure that we
stay in school,
we handle our business, we are
good in everything
that we do, so that we can one
day -- in the
next election, we can make sure
that we make
our voices heard, that we are
the ones running
for Senate, we are the ones
running for president,
we are the ones representing us
in the communities.
TIMMY JOSTEN, Student: My
concerns are that
Donald is kind of going to lose
his temper
a little bit sometimes and say
some not-so-smart
things and get some people
angry.
But I don't think he's going to
make too many
bad decisions.
I think he knows where he's
going.
I think he knows what he's
doing.
MARY OLIVER, Student: The fact
that someone
like Trump is able to be
elected, the things
that he says for women, about
people in different
races, the fact that it's OK for
him to say
those things now makes it seem
more OK for
other people to say those
things.
So, I think that's my biggest
fear.
ZACK BRADLEY, Student: My
concern is war.
But that's a concern with any
candidate.
With Hillary, it was going to be
war with
Russia.
With Trump, it's going to be a
civil war.
And the question is, who is
going to win either
of those?
KATIE ONTIVEROS, Student: Seeing
that my generation
doesn't want to take action or
take responsibility
for their future and my future,
our future,
I just don't want to stay in a
country like
this, if that's what it's going
to be like.
KEALA NAIPO, Student: There is
no doubt that
the president election was a
huge shock to
me.
But I call our citizens to have
some respect
and faith in our country.
We have made it through a civil
war, two world
wars, the Great Depression, and
terrorist
attacks.
But this is no fight.
We elected someone new as
president.
That shouldn't be tearing us
apart.
It should be bringing us
together.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For a closer
look now, we
turn to Kavitha Cardoza of
Education Week,
who has been talking to teachers
across the
country, and Mariama Richards,
an administrator
at Friends Central School just
outside of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Kavitha, let me start with you.
What have you found in your
reporting in the
past couple days?
KAVITHA CARDOZA, Education Week:
Well, this
is something that teachers are
used to.
They have been dealing with
these emotions
through the campaign season.
The election results just made
it more concrete.
Children in schools are just a
microcosm of
society.
And so they're not surprised at
all that some
of these emotions are spilling
into the classroom.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, are these
the students'
own opinions, or are they
parroting what their
parents say at home?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: I think a bit
of both.
With the teenagers we just saw,
some of it
is their own, because they are
reading newspapers
and watching the television
themselves.
But I spoke to a teacher in
California, and
she teaches pre-K, and she says
children just
absorb the stress of their
parents.
And so she teaches in a very
diverse community,
a lot of Muslims, a lot of
immigrants.
And she said she has noticed
that the children
are more aggressive, they're
more prone to
crying, very emotional.
So she and other teachers have
actually put
the learning, the academic goals
on hold with
these children and they have
said, you know
what?
Let's create our own curriculum,
how to be
a good friend, how to listen,
how to be calm
when you feel upset.
She said a lot of the parents
are stressed
about maybe their families being
split up,
maybe losing health care if
Obamacare goes
away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mariama
Richards, what kind
of things are you grappling with
at your school
or the teachers have been coming
to you with?
MARIAMA RICHARDS, Friends
Central School:
One of the biggest issues that
is in front
of us right now is a community
that wants
to see change happen, that felt
really connected
to the election season,
regardless of which
side that particular student or
family was
on.
And now they're grappling with
kind of how
do they push through some of the
values that
they really do love and
appreciate about the
community that they're building
and finding
that there's a split in
perspective on how
to move forward.
For example, there are students
who feel so
angry and upset now, that it's
hard for them
to think about engaging those
who may have
voted for our current
president-elect, because
they see that engagement as
people who think
less of them, who don't think
that they're
full human beings, while there
are other students
who may not necessarily be on
the side of
the president-elect as well, but
they're in
a position where they feel like
this is an
opportunity for us to learn what
the other
side of the world is thinking.
And so even in places where you
have commonalities
in terms of goals, we're still
seeing students
really struggle with kind of,
what's our best
case forward moving forward?
With the little ones, they are
struggling
with very similar things that we
just heard,
fear.
They are hearing lots of
information and not
understanding the context for
it.
And we see it play out
definitely in the classroom
setting in how they're
connecting with others,
whether or not they feel
reserved, whether
or not they feel fear.
And we are, as teachers, trying
to support
them in the process of getting
through that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kavitha
Cardoza, are the
teachers saying, in essence,
what the children
are feeling?
I mean, is there a collective
sense of anxiety
or tension, whether --
regardless- of which
side of the election they came
down on?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: I think the
teachers are
really, really making a
concerted effort to,
no matter what their personal
beliefs, to
be that oasis of calm for the
children and
to kind of bring everyone
together.
There are students who, for
example, supported
climate change, and they are
devastated, we
have heard reports.
There are students -- I spoke to
a teacher
in Ohio, and she said her
students came with
Trump T-shirts and the "Make
America Great
Again" caps, and they were
thrilled.
And so within these schools and
within all
the children, they teach how do
you make it
safe and calm and respectful,
really?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mariama
Richards, you took
steps to prepare parents before
the election.
What are you hearing from them
now?
MARIAMA RICHARDS: After the
election, we have
been in constant communication,
which I think
is really key to that
partnership with families.
And the letters we have sent
home have included
additional links for support.
And in some cases, we have
parents who really
want us to move away and say,
OK, it's over.
Let's now move on with the
practice of going
to school and doing the work.
And there are other families
that are so ultimately
grateful that we're taking that
time to be
able to help their children
through this process.
And I think what we have
learned, as a Quaker
school that's embedded in the
value-centered
curriculum, is that we know, if
students do
not feel affirmed, they actually
won't learn.
We won't be able to teach math
if they feel
scared and if they feel like
they are at risk.
And so we have to be able to
find a wonderful
balance of incorporating both of
those in
the classroom setting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kavitha
Cardoza, we have
been seeing such an increase on
every educational
level, from middle schools to
high school
to colleges, of acts of
intimidation, bullying,
swastikas spray-painted here and
there.
What are you seeing in your
reporting?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: A lot more,
Hari.
One is that these kids share,
tape everything
and share everything on social
media, so it's
much more accessible.
I think just today on my Twitter
feed, I saw
someone say: My daughter came
home from school
and said she heard that she no
longer has
to be politically correct.
And so you're seeing a lot of
things which
kids, some of them don't even
know what the
implications are and what it
means.
But because it's being shared so
widely, kids,
you know, just copy sometimes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
Kavitha Cardoza, Mariama
Richards, thank you
both.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Thank you,
Hari.
MARIAMA RICHARDS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On this Veterans
Day, we turn
to what a Trump administration
might mean
for those who have served our
country.
On Election Day, 61 percent of
veterans voted
for Mr. Trump, 34 percent voted
for Secretary
Clinton.
Of non-veterans, 45 percent
voted Trump, while
half voted for Clinton.
So, what do vets expect a
President Trump
to do?
William Brangham has more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Candidate
Trump repeatedly
expressed support for those who
served in
the U.S. armed forces, and it
showed in the
results on Election Day.
But he also angered many with
his denigration
of Senator John McCain and of
the Khan family,
whose son died fighting in Iraq.
For more on what veterans might
want from
a Trump administration, I'm
joined by Paul
Rieckhoff, executive director of
Iraq and
Afghanistan Veterans of America.
Paul Rieckhoff, as you saw,
Trump was chosen
by veterans 2-1 over Clinton.
Why do you think that is?
PAUL RIECKHOFF, Founder &
Executive Director,
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of
America:
Well, I think we have got to
start by being
careful about overgeneralizing
veterans.
There are 22 million in America,
and they
represent a very large group,
but they're
really not a bloc.
If you look at the older
veterans, about 18
million or so that haven't
served since 9/11,
they tend to be mostly male.
They tend to be more white than
the general
population.
So, really, what some of that is
just a reflection
of the demographics that
supported Trump vs.
Clinton.
And the younger generation,
they're about
20 percent female.
They're much more ethnically
diverse.
So I think we see some more
political diversity
there.
But I think what you do see is a
frustration
with the status quo.
You see some frustration with
the bureaucracy
in Washington.
You see a certain group of folks
who just
don't like Hillary Clinton.
I think that's a very real
problem, just not
in the veterans community, but
more broadly.
And you see folks that respond
to rhetoric.
Donald Trump talked a big game
on veterans.
He said it over and over again:
I'm going
to take care of the vets, I'm
going to take
care of the vets.
Their policies at times were not
that different,
but his rhetoric was much more
aggressive.
And it's a populist issue.
People responded to that and
many people believe
that's what he's going to do.
It's been a campaign platform
that he's really
focused on.
Now we're going to try to hold
him accountable
as he becomes president.
If it's going to be a capstone
of his presidency,
it is going to be a very hard
series of things
to accomplish.
Every president says he is going
to fix the
VA, and most of them leave
without it getting
done.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's say
you're pulled
into the room and you're asked
to counsel
him on policy with regards to
veterans.
What's priority one for you?
PAUL RIECKHOFF: I think priority
one is to
establish a real strong
leadership group within
Washington that is going to make
veterans
at the hub, and not just the VA
at the hub.
Our conversation over the last
two years,
especially after the VA scandal,
has been
only really framed around the
VA.
I think there is an epic
opportunity to be
able to open this conversation
to involve
philanthropy, involve the
private sector,
the medical community,
universities.
Government can't be the only
solution here.
We see it in some of the members
who come
to us in most urgent need; 70
percent are
not enrolled in the VA.
Now, we do need to improve the
VA, but we
have got to have a true veteran
strategy that
expands beyond government.
President Obama has never really
laid that
out.
We attacked the VA problem after
the scandal
and we heard a lot of good talk
from Congress,
but there was never
comprehensive strategy,
after we engaged in multiple
wars, to actually
care for people coming home.
So we have got to clear goals.
We have got to have a strategy.
And we need to have the right
team in place.
This is an opportunity to bring
together a
bipartisan coalition.
It might be the only political
issue we can
get Republicans and Democrats
behind together.
And I think, for any president,
it would be
a smart issue to come out in the
first year
in such a divisive time.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Another issue
that's obviously
very, very troubling is the rate
of suicide
among veterans, something like
20 a day, I
believe.
What can a president, what can a
presidential
administration do to address
that horrendous
issue?
PAUL RIECKHOFF: Well, I think we
have seen
President Obama make tremendous
progress on
this in simply talking about it.
Veterans advocacy groups like
IAVA and others
have been really screaming for
years for help
to try to explain that we're
losing our brothers
and sisters to our left and
right tragically
to suicide on a daily basis.
We had a day last year we had
seven suicide
calls to IAVA in one day alone.
So, I think it does start with
prioritizing
it.
It also starts with
understanding that it's
not just a veterans issue or a
government
issue.
It's a national health priority.
And we have got to rally
resources around
that.
But when veterans do come
forward and they
overcome the stigma and they
respond to that
rhetoric, the help has got to be
there.
And we have seen wait times.
We have seen bureaucracies.
Even the Veterans Crisis Line,
which has been
great, struggled at times to
keep up with
the demand.
So, if those veterans are brave
and are courageous
and are encouraged to come
forward, the resources
have got to be there.
And we have got a critical
shortage of quality
mental health care workers.
One thing IAVA has called on
President Obama
to do and will call on President
Trump to
do is to issue a national call
to service
for people who are qualified
mental health
to serve, to serve in the VA, at
the DOD,
in private nonprofits.
We need an army of mental health
care workers
to support this flood of need
that is coming
home, not just after our wars in
Iraq and
Afghanistan, but after decades
and decades
of veterans who have
underserved.
Many are the veterans that we're
losing to
suicide are Vietnam veterans who
were never
properly cared for.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Paul Rieckhoff,
thank you.
PAUL RIECKHOFF: Thank you, sir.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we come back
to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
And let me just kick this off by
saying there's
nobody I would rather spend more
than nine
hours with on election night
than the two
of you.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you so much,
Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, having said
that, political
earthquake.
The earth moved under our feet,
David.
How big an earthquake was it?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, it's
certainly the political
shock of our lives, at least my
lifetime.
It feels like almost the '60s,
sort of like
political revolution, cultural
revolution,
aesthetic revolution, the things
that now
you can say and get elected
president.
And so it was all those things.
I'm sort of finding myself in a
strange emotional
territory, if I could lie on the
couch here.
On the one hand, Trump appalls
me.
I won't be shy about that.
But having -- with the elective
democratic
process having taken its turn, I
sort of feel
we have to owe some respect to
the process
and owe some respect to the
electorate and
the people who voted him, on the
assumption
that they have something to
teach us.
And so all these people are
marching in the
street.
There is all this hostility.
I find myself -- and I think
this was the
president's attitude and frankly
Hillary Clinton's
attitude -- of respectful pause.
Maybe I will be as upset at
Trump as I was
in another week, but what do
they try to teach
us?
Just try to understand what the
situation
we're in is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Respectful pause,
Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
I, Judy, believe devoutly that
the national
election is the closest thing we
have to a
civic sacrament of democracy.
And I really do think that heed
must be paid,
and when people make a decision,
those who
are on the other side, including
me, accept
it, for that reason.
I think that probably the best
analysis, of
the millions of words that were
written, other
than David's -- David's were
really perceptive
and wise.
But there's a woman named -- I
don't know
her name -- Salena Zito at
"Atlantic."
And she said something.
She said, to understand this
election, critics
of Donald Trump take him
literally, but not
seriously.
His supporters take him
seriously, but not
literally.
In other words, so while his
critics were
very upset with what he said,
the -- his supporters
really were the mood and the
positions he
took, rather than precise
phrases or words.
I say that because now, as of
Tuesday, everyone
has to take him seriously, and I
think that's
what we're seeing.
I think the anxiety in schools
that we hear,
in minority communities, those
with the archbishop
of Los Angeles at Our Lady of
the Saints Cathedral
yesterday at an interfaith
service with Jewish
and Muslim, and was very open
and said, our
children are fearful that their
parents -- the
government is going to come and
take their
parents away.
And I think that's a consequence
of the election.
I mean, in addition, the fact
that he won,
but his positions appear to
prevail, and I
think there have left fear in a
lot of places.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, David, I
was going to
ask the two of you what you
think, with reflection,
the voters were saying.
But I also -- I was struck by
what we just
heard a few minutes ago by
voters in Manassas,
Virginia.
One young woman said, I guess --
she said,
I guess hate is now
state-sponsored.
And we heard a man say --
another woman say,
I'm for immigrants, just the
right immigrants.
What were voters saying, do you
think?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, they
certainly want change.
We know that.
They're fed up with a lot of
talk and no change.
On the issues, they preferred
her.
She got better marks on the
economy and foreign
policy.
But they just didn't get the
sense she was
a reformer.
So they want some unnamed
change.
I think they also wanted some
sense of dignity,
some sense of being heard.
I mean, in some sense, there is
something
noble, in that people that was
people who
felt marginalized, working-class
voters, A,
taking over their party from
basically what
had been a corporate party, and
then asserting
their will on the country,
against groups
of people who were more
privileged than they
are, both on the left and the
right.
And so there is something nice
about that.
I think Trump is the wrong
vehicle for that.
But, you know, you're living in
a town, there
are no jobs in the town, you
know your friends
are dying of O.D.-ing on opiates
or something,
you're having trouble paying
your bills, you're
playing by the rules, and other
people are
getting benefits without playing
by the rules.
Maybe you're willing to tolerate
a lot of
bigotry from Donald Trump if you
say, just
change things, just change
things.
And so I don't -- I think the
voters who voted
for him certainly are willing to
tolerate
a lot of ugliness, but maybe, if
you're in
desperate circumstances, or you
think the
country is deeply in trouble,
you're willing
to tolerate that without
necessarily liking
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you
hear?
What do you think the voters
were saying?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the first
thing that bothers
me are my liberal friends, or
too many of
them, I think who immediately
run to the race
card.
The fact is that it's the most
dangerous place
to be on the political scale is
to brand those
on the other side as racist.
That's the atomic bomb.
That's the nuclear weapon of an
American.
Once I accuse you of racist, I
have demonized
you, and it means any future
collaboration,
cooperation between us is a sign
of my moral
deficiency, if I would deal with
someone like
that.
It's just -- it's a terrible
thing to do.
I say that for a factual reason.
Barack Obama carried Iowa,
carried Wisconsin,
carried Michigan.
He not only carried Iowa,
Wisconsin and Michigan
twice.
He carried the white -- a
majority of the
white vote in those states.
And so Hillary Clinton lost
them, Donald Trump
won them, and it's a little, I
think, transparent,
false to say that the people are
racist.
These are the same voters who
would vote for
an African-American man and
didn't vote for
the white woman Democrat.
So, I think that's dangerous.
I think, Judy, it was a revolt
of working-class
Americans.
I think it was a revolt against
us in the
press.
I think it was a revolt against
the ruling
class who were indifferent to
their plight,
to the fact that, for a
generation, their
standard of living has declined
or that their
children's futures are blighted.
I thought Peter Hart and Dan
McGinn, when
they wrote that the people who
led this revolution
are foreign to Washington and
New York, they
don't go to Starbucks and they
don't take
their children on tours, they
care about high
school sports more than about
pro sports,
they go to Wal-Mart, McDonald's,
and they
have declining incomes, and they
think their
grandparents and parents built
this country.
They scream that they want their
country back.
And I think that -- I think they
saw indifference
from the ruling elites, both
public and private,
particularly private.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You said it
wasn't race.
And, yet, David, people -- many
people of
color are saying they feel the
message is
directed at them.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
So, there is a racial element
here.
There is clearly a racial
element.
And so I think that I don't have
a machine
to peer into the souls of the
voters.
So I don't know how much of the
racial element
was dominant, how much was
there, something
they tolerated, something they
endorsed.
Clearly, for some people, it was
a large element.
I do not believe, having spent
these last
many months interviewing Trump
voters, that
it's a dominant element in at
least a lot
of the people I spoke to.
They had good reason, as Mark
just elucidated,
for why they were really upset
with the course
of the country.
Their culture, their life
economically, socially,
families breaking apart, drug
use, it's going
downhill.
And I think the two things --
one, we don't
want to turn this into a
children of light,
children of darkness, where us
college-enlightened
people, educated, enlightened
people are looking
down at those primitive hordes.
We do not want that.
That's what -- that
condescension is what
fueled this thing in the first
place.
And so I don't think we want
that.
Second, through American
history, we have
had populist movements that
often, often,
often have this ugly racial
element.
But, often, there are warning
signs of some
deeper social and economic
problem.
And we have rapidly increasing
technology,
which is making life very good
for people
who are good at using words, and
not so good
for people who are not good at
using words.
And so the ugliness can
sometimes be super
ugly, but also a warning sign of
something
down below.
MARK SHIELDS: No, I agree with
what David
said.
I would just add, Judy, that the
problem is
that what Donald Trump said, if
you take it
literally now, is cause for
anxiety and nervousness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean during
the campaign.
MARK SHIELDS: What he said
during the campaign,
I mean, is -- it's legitimate,
the anxiety
and the nervousness that you
feel and that
children feel right now, because
-- if you
do take him literally.
He has to do something to
reassure, and beyond
tweeting that he either likes or
doesn't like
protests.
I just -- the protests, the
breaking of windows
at this point, I mean, I just
want anybody
in the protest to have an "I
voted" sticker
on their jacket lapel before
they get out
there.
And I understand the concern,
but please accept
this democracy.
And he is the president.
He's going to be the president
in 75 days,
or whatever.
And, you know, he now has a
responsibility,
I think, to calm those waters
and to reassure
people that there isn't going to
be -- there
aren't going to be Storm
Troopers coming down
to take their grandparents in a
patrol wagon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly, in
the last couple
of minutes, David, we are seeing
some signals
from Donald Trump or the people
he has put
on his transition committee,
putting in the
vice president-elect, instead of
Chris Christie.
He's putting his children, his
son-in-law
on that committee.
He said today that he's -- in an
interview
with The Wall Street Journal
that he's thinking
about keeping part of the health
care reform
law after talking to President
Obama about
it.
So, what are we to think?
Maybe this is not going to be
all the big
moves that were hinted at during
the campaign?
DAVID BROOKS: I'm obviously
outraged Tiffany
didn't get a job.
Maybe she will get Fed chairman
or something.
I think when -- the nomination
of Mike Pence
is more of a sign that he's
going for conventional
Republicans.
Until last summer, Pence was a
very conventional
-- he was in the House, well
connected with
the conventional movement
Republicans.
And I assume he will tap, he may
be more conventional.
I think Donald Trump is going to
find it very
hard to do the kind of massive
change he wants.
Obamacare is woven into the
fabric of health
care.
It's very hard to just rip it
out, as he sort
of acknowledged with The Wall
Street Journal.
The Iran deal, maybe we can
withdraw from
the deal, but our other partners
are not going
to withdraw from the deal.
When you get down to each of
these individual
things, deporting people, when
you get down
to each of the individual
things, the barriers
to change are massive.
And the simple promises he makes
just don't
apply to reality.
So he's got to do some big
changes, because
what he was voted on.
But when you think about how to
do it, it
would take massive expertise,
which his people,
believe me, do not have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just 20 seconds,
Mark.
What do you think he...
MARK SHIELDS: Well, 213 times to
vote to repeal
Obamacare, it's a very easy,
grandstand act.
Doing it and taking 20 million
people and
taking them off insurance, those
with preexisting
conditions, those who don't have
any other
coverage, you know, that's a
reality.
And it is going to be difficult,
make no mistake
about it.
And this is where you confront
reality from
the rhetoric of the campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The transition
begins.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you both.
Paris will mark a grim
anniversary Sunday,
one year after a series of
coordinated attacks
across the city on Friday the
13th, 2015.
The Bataclan music club, where
89 people were
murdered during a concert, is
due to reopen
tomorrow with a concert by
Sting.
Gunmen and suicide bombers
allied to ISIS
murdered 130 people in total,
wounding nearly
400.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant has
been back to Paris to see how
the French capital
is coping one year on.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Paris has
returned to a version
of normality, but for those
caught up in the
worst attack on the French
capital since the
Second World War, nothing will
ever be the
same again.
In a discreet corner of this
cafe is Caroline
Langlade, a survivor of the
Bataclan.
Along with several others, she
hid in a tiny
room for over three hours.
They barricaded the door with a
sofa and mini-fridge.
The terrorists tried to get in,
failed and
resumed the massacre they began
while the
band was on stage.
(GUNFIRE)
CAROLINE LANGLADE, President,
Life for Paris
(through translator): I have a
really hard
time going to closed-up places
or dark rooms,
movies, concerts, but also
restaurants where
there's too many people at
night.
It makes me quite jumpy.
I tend to panic.
MALCOLM BRABANT: During the
interview, sirens
wailed nearby, and Caroline
became uncomfortable.
The film director has found it
difficult to
concentrate on work and instead
devotes her
energies running Life for Paris,
an organization
for survivors and families of
those murdered
on Friday the 13th.
CAROLINE LANGLADE (through
translator): I'm
no longer afraid of death.
I have seen it up close, and I
almost died
several times that night.
I'm no longer afraid of death,
but my fear
changed.
And, today, what frightens me
most is suffering,
physical suffering, human
suffering.
I had to face a gigantic amount
of it that
evening, and I think that I have
lived through
all the suffering I could have
had for a lifetime.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This video
captured the panic
and bravery of survivors as they
fled the
Bataclan and tried to drag the
wounded and
dying to safety.
Parents watching the atrocities
unfold on
television desperately hoped
their children
had made it through the
emergency exits.
For Georges Salines, the
anniversary rekindles
the agony of discovering that
his music-loving
daughter, Lola, was one of the
89 murder victims.
MD-BO /GEORGES SALINES, Father
of Victim:
What I miss the most is simply
talking to
her and listening to her about
her new discoveries,
because she was always full of
projects.
For me, the most important thing
was writing.
I wrote a book.
And after publishing my book, I
kept on writing.
And writing has been very
helpful, because
it helps me to put some distance
between my
pain and me.
MALCOLM BRABANT: After a year of
silence,
the Bataclan is about to be
revived as a concert
hall for the living, no longer
just a shrine
to contemplate the unspeakable.
One year after Friday the 13th,
France remains
under a state of emergency.
The powers were expanded and
extended after
the horrific attack in Nice,
when a terrorist
took a truck and mowed down
people, killing
86 and wounding nearly 500.
France's interior minister says
the country
cannot live in an indefinite
state of emergency.
And groups like Human Rights
Watch have warned
that the continued use of the
powers erodes
the rule of law and undermines
the rights
of citizens.
The Eiffel Tower and other
landmarks may radiate
an abiding allure, but terrorism
has cast
a permanent shadow on the City
of Light.
It's no longer possible to take
a leisurely
stroll beneath the steel
latticework without
first undergoing security
screening.
The impression that this is a
country on a
war footing with an invisible
enemy is reinforced
by military patrols.
Colombe Brossel, the deputy
mayor, with responsibility
for security issues, says the
authorities
are trying to strike a balance.
COLOMBE BROSSEL, Deputy Mayor of
Paris (through
translator): Our wish, our
directive line,
is to say, we have to give our
best, our maximum
when it comes to security
questions.
So, of course, the way we
organize the events
is different compared to 18
months ago, two
or five years ago.
But we remain adamant on the
fact that Paris
needs to remain a city where
anyone can go
out, where we can have events in
the public
space, where we can share
moments of pleasure
and happiness.
FRANCOIS GERE, President, French
Strategic
Analysis Institute: The Islamic
State is losing
ground, is losing also prestige
and glory.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Historian
Francois Gere,
president of the French
Strategic Analysis
Institute, believes that France
will almost
certainly be hit again by
Islamic State, although
he's convinced the
organization's potency
is diminishing.
FRANCOIS GERE: It's obvious that
the Islamic
State will try to send
additional people in
order to perpetrate attacks and
terrorist
aggressions in Europe.
There is still a period of high
danger during
the coming six months.
After that, it will decrease.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The Marais is
one district
that's especially vigilant, not
least because
of the high concentration of
Jewish businesses
and institutions.
MAN (through translator): We're
scared, but
we have to keep living normally.
MAN (through translator): At
every synagogue
and school, you have dozens of
soldiers.
I'm relaxed about it because
it's easier for
us Jews to wear the kippa.
WOMAN: During this whole year, I
think the
thing was to say to yourself,
keep on living.
You cannot live in fear, and you
just need
to carry on your daily life as
normal.
Otherwise, yes, where do we go?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Stephane
Balensi is considering
selling his clothes shop.
Sales have plunged by 40 percent
over the
past year.
Although he's reassured by
military patrols,
he believes they frighten
tourists away.
STEPHANE BALENSI, Business Owner
(through
translator): It started with the
13th of November.
Quite clearly, ever since the
Bataclan and
then during the normally busy
summer season,
we had the Nice attacks.
It's the same, far less tourism.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Beligh Nabli is
a political
scientist and analyst of the
Islamic world.
He says intolerance towards
Muslims has become
more overt since the attacks.
BELIGH NABLI, Political
Scientist (through
translator): A lot of people
kept their Islamophobia
hidden before, but now they feel
it's OK to
express their aversion and
criticism of Islam
in general and towards Muslims
in particular.
It's created a new social
tension, which has
given more justification to the
jihadis in
their strategy of dividing
French society
in order to lure back the Muslim
community
to their cause.
MALCOLM BRABANT: France is
gearing up for
a presidential election in six
months' time.
The latest opinion polls suggest
that almost
a third of the electorate
believe the hard-line
stance of Marine Le Pen, leader
of the right-wing
National Front, would make the
country a safer
place.
But the divisions in society
exposed by last
year's attacks worry those most
affected.
GEORGES SALINES: Candidates are
playing this
card, and it's a very dangerous
path, because
the most important thing is to
be precise
in targeting the terrorists, the
extremists,
Da'esh, and not doing anything
which could
help them to recruit.
CAROLINE LANGLADE (through
translator): I
think that the most beautiful
response we
can give the terrorists is love,
joy, happiness,
culture, music.
So, we need to keep this going
as loud as
possible.
So, yes, I hope we will continue
even stronger,
that people will realize that
life isn't about
the money.
Life doesn't revolve around the
little problems
we might have.
Life is love.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But while Paris
puts on a
brave face, a new survey shows
that terrorism
remains the biggest concern of
almost half
the French population.
They fear that Islamic State
will follow through
on a threat made earlier this
year to intensify
attacks on France in revenge for
its military
role against the caliphate, a
world away from
Notre Dame.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Paris.
Later tonight on "Washington
Week": Questions
remain about why voters in the
country's heartland
felt they were not being heard.
Is there a Washington bubble?
"Washington Week"'s reporters
have some answers
on your PBS station.
Tomorrow, on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend": a closer
look at president-elect Trump's
ideas to sprout
investments in infrastructure.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
After this earthquake of a week,
enjoy the
weekend.
Thank you, and good night.